Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the red button has come on here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, which means the lecture recording has started, which means
that it's the start of the class.
NOTE CONF
So, um.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Welcome, everybody, to, um, introduction to linear algebra.
Um, this, for many of you, will be the main,
NOTE CONF
uh, first semester mathematics class.
Um, I showed it at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Um, apologise a little bit for the slightly cramped accommodation.
Um, because this is just a one off lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've had lower priority in the allocation.
Um, the other lectures that we have are over in
NOTE CONF
the Swan Lecture Theatre, which is larger.
Um, so it won't feel quite as cramped.
NOTE CONF
Um, so without further ado, the three of us here
are the teaching team.
NOTE CONF
We are your lecturers for introduction of linear algebra.
Um, we each say a little bit about it when
NOTE CONF
it is our turn.
Um, so we've got Cordelia here.
NOTE CONF
We've got Eric here, and I am Andreas Grotto.
I will start telling you something about the general organisation
NOTE CONF
of the course, what you meant to do when, how
it's meant to work for about 20 minutes or so,
NOTE CONF
and then Cordelia and Eric will do the more exciting
thing and tell you a little bit about the sort
NOTE CONF
of mathematics you will be doing in this course.
So without further ado, this is me, Andreas.
NOTE CONF
I'm originally from Germany, although I've been Edinburgh for quite
a while.
NOTE CONF
My specialisation is applied mathematics, particular optimisation and they are
optimisation under uncertainty, but that will not very much impact
NOTE CONF
this course.
Apart from that, I see myself as a giving you
NOTE CONF
the more applied side or where this might be useful
in applied mathematics.
NOTE CONF
This semester I'm doing Ila as the only course, and
next semester I am teaching a fourth year MSC course
NOTE CONF
on optimisation.
Okay, so on the course will be we have ten
NOTE CONF
weeks of material, which is all in this textbook here,
which is free.
NOTE CONF
It is available online as PDF from the course website.
And we'll be working through some of the topics in
NOTE CONF
there.
We can't cover everything in these ten weeks.
NOTE CONF
After the ten weeks, we have one week of revision
of the material before the final assessment, which I say
NOTE CONF
is something more about these ten weeks.
I sort of organise, we organise them by topic and
NOTE CONF
every topic will roughly run Wednesday to Wednesday during the
week.
NOTE CONF
So here's a rough breakdown of what you ought to
do, or guide of what we think you ought to
NOTE CONF
do at what point.
So at the start, there's some pre-reading.
NOTE CONF
I'll tell you a little bit more about it where
we tell you what chapters of the book you should
NOTE CONF
have a look at before the lectures.
Um, Thursday and Fridays are the actual lectures.
NOTE CONF
These are interactive for what we call flipped classroom.
Um, and I will tell you a little bit of
NOTE CONF
that in the next slide.
Um, on the Monday after, um, there is a reading
NOTE CONF
quiz.
This is online.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's more material for you to go through in
your own time.
NOTE CONF
About an hour's worth of material.
Um, there'll be more, um, sort of examples or some
NOTE CONF
content that goes a little bit deeper into the topic.
Um, Tuesdays we have the workshops.
NOTE CONF
Um, we are all working together with a tutor on
problems related to that week's topic.
NOTE CONF
And then up until the Wednesday, there is an assessed
quiz on the material of the week.
NOTE CONF
Um, note that I say the workshops will start this
week, although we haven't actually done any material or any
NOTE CONF
pre-reading yet.
Um, just to get to know the whole thing.
NOTE CONF
And there's a few questions that are, um, sort of
generally following on from school mathematics, you will have fun,
NOTE CONF
but workshops are starting tomorrow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what is there to do?
Pre-reading.
NOTE CONF
So this flipped classroom concept that we are doing here.
Um, it's based on that.
NOTE CONF
We'll give you reading to do in the book before
the lectures.
NOTE CONF
So um, there's a set text.
You should do that.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is a mandatory preparation for the lectures.
Um, and at the lectures, we're not going going to
NOTE CONF
go through all the material, but rather, um, will be
giving you a pause for asking your questions on the
NOTE CONF
material.
Um, and it'll be like, um, give us your opinion
NOTE CONF
on that.
We'll have a statistic on how many people have answered
NOTE CONF
what.
And then discuss with your neighbour with somebody, whether you
NOTE CONF
think that what you have, what the right answer may
be, what what the answer is.
NOTE CONF
So it's very interactive and it's mandatory that you have
prepared the material before the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, all this the reading guide and all this materials
and what we call stack, um, this is part and
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to show that to you.
Um, this is part of the course website.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I think this should come up.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
On that side.
NOTE CONF
So this is roughly what you see the course website
as you see it, I see I can make it
NOTE CONF
slightly bigger.
And there's an item there that says online assessment quizzes
NOTE CONF
and lecture material.
Um, that is stack.
NOTE CONF
So if you go on there, um, you'll have a
few more information.
NOTE CONF
Again I see whether I can get it slightly larger.
So there's the course textbook for example.
NOTE CONF
But if you scroll down you'll have the reading guide
down here for week one.
NOTE CONF
So that is what you should start to prepare to
read through mortality.
NOTE CONF
Which part of the book you should read through before
the Thursday and Friday lectures?
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Um, I should say, if you're doing the reading, you
NOTE CONF
should read actively, not just scan the whole thing, but
really try to understand the material as well as you
NOTE CONF
can.
That takes some time.
NOTE CONF
Um, and probably takes some practice to get there, but
we'll try to help you through that.
NOTE CONF
Um, the lectures itself are Thursday Fridays over in the
Swan Lecture Theatre.
NOTE CONF
Slightly bigger because we've got such a large class.
This is only half of the student.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is double taught.
So every lecture will be at 12, and we're repeating
NOTE CONF
it again at one.
Um, please stick to your timetable, because, you see, it
NOTE CONF
is already quite cramped.
Um, I did say about this flipped interactive.
NOTE CONF
I give you I give you an example of a
poll in a second, um, based on the reading for
NOTE CONF
that work.
And really it is the whole idea of the whole
NOTE CONF
thing, that it is interactive, that the students are there,
that we can do sort of stuff with you.
NOTE CONF
So although everything is recorded, this is mainly done for
revision purposes.
NOTE CONF
So do come to the lectures.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'll just we'll have a quick play of the
NOTE CONF
poll.
So if you try to scan the QR code, QR
NOTE CONF
code that I've got there, um, and um, actually I
do need to quickly just go.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
How do I do this now?
Ah, I have the QR code there at the moment
NOTE CONF
on both.
And I probably need to go on this here.
NOTE CONF
No, where am I, where am I?
Ah, sorry.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And they should give you a poll, hopefully.
Um, and the questions for that poll are the following.
NOTE CONF
So have you paid?
Do you know, from what I said so far, at
NOTE CONF
which day of the week, the first lecture for Introduction
to Linear Algebra will be.
NOTE CONF
And if you do so, um, you should the QR
code should write I haven't got the QR code.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
The QR code should get you to that poll.
Um, and I think this is open for two minutes
NOTE CONF
and I haven't got the time.
I get the moment.
NOTE CONF
The towel.
Because my coffee cup is right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, okay.
So let me just have a peek where we are.
NOTE CONF
144 people.
So anybody still trying to work out how to get
NOTE CONF
into the system?
I'll give you a few more seconds.
NOTE CONF
So during the lecture we will give you sort of
time to discuss stuff with your neighbours.
NOTE CONF
Um, and um, depending on how complicated the question is,
you will have some time to do these polls.
NOTE CONF
That won't be quite as rushed, but.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think, um, you see in the idea.
NOTE CONF
So if I go back here and I will display
the results.
NOTE CONF
Do we see that?
And yes, indeed, the first lecture is going to be
NOTE CONF
on Thursday.
That was option three.
NOTE CONF
So well done.
And I would now ask you to discuss with your
NOTE CONF
neighbours before telling you what the right question is.
This.
NOTE CONF
Ask you to discuss with your neighbours whether you really
got the right idea then okay, so that is the
NOTE CONF
idea.
I go back to the, um, organisational part of it.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Um, the next bit, I'll take a little bit, um,
NOTE CONF
through um, sort of the other things that is happening.
This is a bit for reference, really.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to go relatively quickly through this part.
Um, so as I say, on Mondays we have a
NOTE CONF
reading quiz.
There'll be more material.
NOTE CONF
You work through that on your own time.
Um, has some videos on key concepts and probably examples.
NOTE CONF
Um, they are released early on Monday morning and you've
got time until Tuesday to work through this.
NOTE CONF
You should really work through the reading quiz because it
has additional material before the workshops on Tuesdays.
NOTE CONF
Um, there will be these questions.
The answers you give, there are questions in there.
NOTE CONF
There will be.
You get feedback that you will get a score that
NOTE CONF
doesn't impact your final grade.
Um, we then have the workshops on Tuesday.
NOTE CONF
You're all assigned to a small group, this with about
12 students together with a tutor.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is here that you're working on unseen
problems related to that week's topic, together with other people
NOTE CONF
in your group.
The tutor is there to try to help you.
NOTE CONF
Um, if there are any questions, um, you can also,
if you have good questions for the lectures, you don't
NOTE CONF
understand something.
You want some more insight?
NOTE CONF
This would be the time to discuss it with your
tutor.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
You should prepare for the workshop.
NOTE CONF
There's no questions.
The questions that you only see on the morning of
NOTE CONF
the workshop, but you should prepare for the workshop by
going through all the lecture material or the material of
NOTE CONF
that week of the topic for the week.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Assessments, um, that we have that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, um, there's no exam in Ila.
Um, but we've got three bits of assessment.
NOTE CONF
On the one hand, we've got every week at the
end of the week, there will be an online quiz
NOTE CONF
that tests how much you've understood or that you've understood
the material for that week.
NOTE CONF
Um, these will count 40% of the over grade.
Um, we then have for hand in assessments where we
NOTE CONF
ask you to write something on paper, scan it and
upload it to be marked.
NOTE CONF
They're a little bit more elaborate than the quizzes.
There'll be four of them.
NOTE CONF
They will count 30%.
And in the end we've got a synoptic assessment.
NOTE CONF
Again, this is online like the quizzes.
Um but it will cover the whole material that we
NOTE CONF
taught over the course.
Um, this is the remaining 30%.
NOTE CONF
To pass the course, you will need a weighted average
of 40% over all these components.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's no nothing that you have to pass any
any individual component.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you don't do that, there is one recent
opportunity in August next year.
NOTE CONF
So the weekly assessments, um, they're released every Monday at
9 a.m..
NOTE CONF
You've got time until Thursday to do them one hour
in your own time, whenever you want to do that.
NOTE CONF
Once you start them, there are two hours.
There's a two hour time limit.
NOTE CONF
Once you start at that, you have only one attempt
for these quizzes.
NOTE CONF
Now only one attempt means that you can try.
We also have a practice quiz.
NOTE CONF
Um, the practice quiz.
You can do as often as you like, and indeed
NOTE CONF
you have to achieve at least 80% on this practice
quiz before you can do the assessed quiz.
NOTE CONF
em.
Um, the quizzes are that we say, um, you've got
NOTE CONF
ten of them.
Only the eight best ones will count for your final
NOTE CONF
grade.
On the other hand, we don't accept because they're marked
NOTE CONF
immediately online.
We don't accept extensions for the material in the quiz.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you'll have to if you can't do it
for the following week, you've got the other weeks to
NOTE CONF
do them.
Um, the hand and assessments.
NOTE CONF
Um, you'll have to.
These are uploaded to the website.
NOTE CONF
We tell you more about it when they come.
The first is in week two.
NOTE CONF
Um, they usually cover the topics we've done immediately before
the, um, the handedness due.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's a little bit more proof based that you
have to think it's not just a quiz.
NOTE CONF
You'll have to think a little bit.
Um, and you will get feedback there marked by your
NOTE CONF
tutors.
Um, you can discuss these at the tutors there will
NOTE CONF
be released on Thursdays, and you've got the almost the
following week until the next Wednesday to do these?
NOTE CONF
The final assessment is at the beginning of December.
It runs over a whole week.
NOTE CONF
You have two hours to do that.
You can start these two hours at any point during
NOTE CONF
the week.
They have the same format like the assessed quizzes, just
NOTE CONF
that the problems are spanning the whole of all the
topics that we have in that week.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, for this one you could get extensions if you
wanted to.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then finally, if you're not past the course
on the first try with this assessment, there is a
NOTE CONF
risk assessment only for those that fail at the first
try.
NOTE CONF
So this is not you can't like get your grade
better through this.
NOTE CONF
Only if you haven't um passed the first time.
Um, that will then be 100% of your grade if
NOTE CONF
you pass this assessment.
That will run in August next year.
NOTE CONF
Um, I'll tell you more about it then.
So here is I'm not going to go into more
NOTE CONF
detail.
Here's an overview of what is going on.
NOTE CONF
On which day of the week from Wednesday to Wednesday.
Pretty much covered all of that.
NOTE CONF
I just want to make you aware that there's two
deadlines.
NOTE CONF
Oh, I should say that if you're all marking this,
the slides will all go onto the course website after
NOTE CONF
we finished with this session.
So you have them for reference material.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so other things, um, a bit of the elephant
in the room.
NOTE CONF
Um, generative AI ChatGPT and so on.
To be perfectly honest, you probably all passed the cause
NOTE CONF
if you just do ChatGPT for every assignment.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Well, that's not the point.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, the point is that this really is a fundamental
cause for what you're studying later.
NOTE CONF
And the material that we're teaching you here you will
need all throughout your studies.
NOTE CONF
So if you're starting to not to just rely on
ChatGPT to do everything, you're missing out on this.
NOTE CONF
It will hurt you later.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So the point is, it's fundamental skills.
It's your interest to understand the material that make use
NOTE CONF
of us here to do so.
Just to summarise the rules that we're using here, you
NOTE CONF
must not use GPT for any of the assessed components
of this course.
NOTE CONF
I'm not allowed to do that.
On the other hand, you are allowed and it's actually
NOTE CONF
quite good at this to use ChatGPT or these tools
in order to help you with understanding the lecture material.
NOTE CONF
If you don't understand a certain topic, go ask GPT
whether it can help you and you can ask it
NOTE CONF
further questions.
Actually pretty good at sort of doing interactively trying to
NOTE CONF
help you.
So for that type of stuff, it is perfectly feasible
NOTE CONF
to use it, just not for anything assessed.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So what else is there?
NOTE CONF
Support?
Um, I say that the main thing really is the
NOTE CONF
workshops.
So if you're struggling with something or even if you're
NOTE CONF
not struggling just it is important that you try to
discuss these problems with other students with your tutor.
NOTE CONF
Get a deeper understanding than it just get from reading
the book.
NOTE CONF
So the workshops are a one number one opportunity to
try to get help or to get a deeper understanding
NOTE CONF
of that topic that we're doing here.
We also have a drop in centre called Math Base
NOTE CONF
in Kings Buildings house.
So this is meant I'm not entirely sure of the
NOTE CONF
opening hours, but it's pretty much manageable throughout the day
on weekdays, and there's always tutors there that can help
NOTE CONF
you with any of the year one on year two
mathematics classes.
NOTE CONF
Do you use that?
They're friendly.
NOTE CONF
You can basically live in there if you want to
just work on your problems and discuss it with other
NOTE CONF
people if you want to.
Um, we have an online forum called Piazza, which is
NOTE CONF
linked from the website.
You can post questions there.
NOTE CONF
You can post anonymously if you like to.
You can also answer each other's questions.
NOTE CONF
If a question hasn't been answered for a day or
so, then we or one of the tutors will start,
NOTE CONF
try it or will start answering the questions.
So do you make the use of that?
NOTE CONF
Um, this is usually quite useful.
Um, so again reference page.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's the material that you find on the learn
page.
NOTE CONF
Um, and on the stack part of the learn page
that I showed you earlier.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then my final slide is, um, just this.
Don't panic.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a tendency if you come in here
that you're overwhelmed.
NOTE CONF
A lot of people will be overwhelmed.
Um, and you will let the tutorial find the, um.
NOTE CONF
Or you find the other students who seem to know
everything, who've got an intelligent answer, intelligent questions for everything.
NOTE CONF
And you're thinking, this is not me.
Don't worry.
NOTE CONF
Everybody's in the same boat here.
Everybody feels like that at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Ask for help.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
This is this is important.
NOTE CONF
And discuss it with other people.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, I always like to say mathematics is a team
sport.
NOTE CONF
It is much easier for not trying to do it
on your own or different, different slant on.
NOTE CONF
The thing that I like to say at this point
is all mathematics actually, at all levels, even for us,
NOTE CONF
looks very difficult if you first see it.
On the other hand, it all looks very easy once
NOTE CONF
you get on the other side.
And if you understood it, yeah, it is our job
NOTE CONF
here with your help, obviously, to try to get it
onto the other side.
NOTE CONF
All we need from you in that process is confidence
that you will get there and you will get there.
NOTE CONF
You are.
Just don't be overwhelmed if you're stuck at the difficult
NOTE CONF
thing at the start, and the process of getting there
is actually quite fun, I believe.
NOTE CONF
Right?
Okay, that's it for me.
NOTE CONF
Um, see you soon.
Indeed.
NOTE CONF
Tomorrow at the workshops.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Um, without further ado, I'll hand on to my colleagues,
and we should have time for questions at the end
NOTE CONF
of the session.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Skipper.
NOTE CONF
And you'll have to.
Do it with the hopes that working.
NOTE CONF
I mean, you want it off on the.
Second.
NOTE CONF
Um, what are you.
Planning on working out?
NOTE CONF
Because you won't be able to do that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's just.
Is it?
NOTE CONF
It's just a laptop.
It's just a the laptop here.
NOTE CONF
That is working.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Is that working?
That does sound like it's working.
NOTE CONF
Is the microphone working?
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that isn't just me.
It's.
NOTE CONF
It's the same that all.
Maybe it's muted.
NOTE CONF
I don't think so.
It's not muted.
NOTE CONF
No okay.
Oh well.
NOTE CONF
That's actually work.
You probably just need to start talking.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Hello.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now this one's not working, so I'm not me.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I tend to shout into these things so much, so
NOTE CONF
I'll shout.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now.
NOTE CONF
Is that working?
Okay, good.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Hello?
NOTE CONF
So we've rejigged all the text so we can start
again.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is, that's that's the boring what the
course is.
NOTE CONF
So this is the less boring what the course is?
Uh, well, actually, from a mathematical point of view.
NOTE CONF
So what is linear algebra?
Um, firstly, who am I?
NOTE CONF
That's a good place to start.
I am also new in Edinburgh.
NOTE CONF
I started two weeks ago so we can all get
lost on campus together.
NOTE CONF
Um, feel free to kind of say hi.
If you're lost, I might be able to help.
NOTE CONF
Um, unlike these two, I am a pure mathematician.
I come from a geometric point background.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I will be bringing more of that side
of maths into it.
NOTE CONF
And you will see me again next term, where I
will be teaching you a lot of proofs and problem
NOTE CONF
solving.
So hopefully I'm not terrible.
NOTE CONF
Um, I also like making mathematical models, so I will
come when I'm in my weeks and come and wave
NOTE CONF
weird maths models that I spend too much of my
free time making, in the hope that it might help
NOTE CONF
you understand some stuff.
Um, if you ever want to come play with them,
NOTE CONF
come find my office, I have loads.
Um, so what is linear algebra?
NOTE CONF
Briefly, the answer is vectors and matrices.
Who has seen vectors before?
NOTE CONF
Hands up.
Should hopefully be nearly all of you.
NOTE CONF
Excellent.
Keep your hand up if you have also seen matrices.
NOTE CONF
Oh, also, most of you.
That's good.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that is essentially what we're studying.
But let's go into a bit more detail.
NOTE CONF
Um, hopefully we've all seen algebra before.
You've got equations.
NOTE CONF
And uh, solving some equations.
Uh, if you're linear, then that means an unknown, some
NOTE CONF
coefficient, often a coefficients a number.
In this course it will nearly always be a number.
NOTE CONF
But it could be anything.
It could be, um, some other kind of coefficient, which
NOTE CONF
we'll see later.
Uh, so it's not two coefficients times together.
NOTE CONF
It's nothing going to be x squared.
There's no x is y's.
NOTE CONF
There's no signs causes or anything like that happening to
the variable.
NOTE CONF
Um signs causes squareds and whatnot can happen in the
coefficient but not to the variable.
NOTE CONF
Our variable is just an x sitting there by itself.
Um, so linear algebra is trying to solve linear equations.
NOTE CONF
Putting those two things together.
We're trying to solve equations that are linear.
NOTE CONF
That is what it is.
So for example you cannot see um, there was an
NOTE CONF
example on the bottom of this board that we will.
There we go.
NOTE CONF
Some linear equations that you might have solved before.
Hopefully not those ones in things.
NOTE CONF
Um, but but those are some linear equations of the
type we will be solving.
NOTE CONF
So basically it's a lot like school maths that you've
solved equations like that.
NOTE CONF
You've probably been solving them for a good decade now.
Um, so we're going to keep solving those, but we're
NOTE CONF
going to make them a bit harder in two ways.
We're going to either add more coefficients, we're going to
NOTE CONF
move into higher dimensions, more abstract things, um, or look
at more kind of abstract objects.
NOTE CONF
So instead of coefficients being numbers, and instead of trying
to solve for a number, we might try to solve
NOTE CONF
for another mathematical object.
Um, that's happening maybe a bit later.
NOTE CONF
So that's one way of viewing linear algebra.
Just essentially equations like that, which hands up if you've
NOTE CONF
got an idea where to start with solving something like
that.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that's where we're starting, hopefully somewhere nice and safe
NOTE CONF
and kind of within most people's familiar ballpark.
Um, everything's linear.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we can write this as a matrix.
People are nodding.
NOTE CONF
People are happy.
We can write this as a matrix of coefficients, which
NOTE CONF
is kind of a similar way of writing matrix.
Putting them together.
NOTE CONF
Again, people are nodding.
Um, and we can find a systematic way to solve
NOTE CONF
any system of equations.
In fact, that's what we're doing in week one.
NOTE CONF
Hooray!
But that's just week one, and there's a whole nother
NOTE CONF
nine weeks.
So that is the kind of longer list of what
NOTE CONF
we are doing this term.
Um, presumably the words get more and more unknown the
NOTE CONF
longer you go down that list.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Don't worry, it'll be fine.
We'll go through it slowly.
NOTE CONF
So the next thing on the list is a vector
space.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I give you a vector three minus five
two, that could be many things.
NOTE CONF
So it could be a point in three dimensional space.
Three in the x direction, minus five in the y
NOTE CONF
two in the z.
That's probably what most people are familiar with.
NOTE CONF
But it could be other things.
It could be a bit of statistical data or the
NOTE CONF
properties of an object, maybe its colour, for example.
Or it could be something even more abstract.
NOTE CONF
It could be a polynomial.
I could say, well, in relation instead of x, y
NOTE CONF
and z, I could say one x and x squared,
or I could go even more abstract.
NOTE CONF
And instead of x, y z I could have sine
x, sine two x and sine three x.
NOTE CONF
I said there was no not going to be any
functions with variables, but there they are.
NOTE CONF
We're not solving for them though.
So all of this depends if I give some if
NOTE CONF
some mathematician anywhere in the department come up to you
and gives you a vector, they might not just be
NOTE CONF
talking about a vector in three dimensional, you're talking about
something much more general, depending on their context, the conventions
NOTE CONF
they have, or to use the kind of proper maths
lingo, their vector space and the particular basis they're using.
NOTE CONF
So we'll look into that.
Um, but we won't jump into that more abstract side.
NOTE CONF
To begin with, we'll start with nice, familiar 2D and
3D space that you've been doing for years and years.
NOTE CONF
Hopefully we all have a basic grasp of two dimensional
geometry.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can draw it on a sheet of paper.
Uh, you're probably got some familiarity with three dimensional stuff.
NOTE CONF
We're going to do a lot more of it.
Um, we will have demonstrations and I will show you
NOTE CONF
things.
We will all show you things.
NOTE CONF
And I might occasionally come and wave some things in
front of you.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we will get much better at visualising kind
of abstract, three dimensional space.
NOTE CONF
We can't do four dimensional space.
Our brains aren't wired for it, so we can't really
NOTE CONF
visualise anything after that.
So that's that.
NOTE CONF
Um, but what we will do is develop these methods
for two and three dimensional space that can then be
NOTE CONF
extended to four, five, six, seven, 2,000,000,000,004.
Um, if you really wanted to solve some 2,000,000,000,004 dimensional
NOTE CONF
problem, I wouldn't recommend it without a computer.
Um, but this is the importance of proof that we
NOTE CONF
can take a kind of concept we have developed in
two and three dimensions, and generalise it up to something
NOTE CONF
that allows us to solve something ridiculous.
Um, so that's kind of the other side of linear
NOTE CONF
algebra.
We can solve mechanisms of vectors and matrices problems.
NOTE CONF
We can solve these linear equations.
We can develop the theory behind it.
NOTE CONF
And that allows us to completely understand linear equations.
This is one bit of maths where we kind of
NOTE CONF
more or less understand it, which is great and wonderful.
Um, and it allows us to do two things.
NOTE CONF
It allows us to take big, complicated things that exist
in weird and wonderful abstract, applied and weird places.
NOTE CONF
Often you can simplify down to a linear problem and
we can solve linear problems.
NOTE CONF
So that's nice.
So that's one reason linear algebra is really important, because
NOTE CONF
all these bits of maths you're going to learn in
your second, third, fourth, however many years afterwards.
NOTE CONF
Often if you can make it less complicated by making
it linear.
NOTE CONF
But we can also do the opposite if we understand
what's happening in two and three dimensions, and we generalise
NOTE CONF
it to 456 405, we can also generalise it out
of matrices and vectors, the kind of ideas we develop
NOTE CONF
here.
Build your mathematical brains and build the idea of how
NOTE CONF
to do proof, and even how to solve these equations,
so we can solve far more complicated equations later on.
NOTE CONF
So on that note.
Here's Erik.
NOTE CONF
Hello.
Um, welcome.
NOTE CONF
My name is Eric Eric Horman.
I will be this.
NOTE CONF
This microphone is not.
I will be the third lecturer on this course.
NOTE CONF
Despite my German sounding name, I'm actually Italian.
I studied in Italy until coming here to do my
NOTE CONF
PhD, and I joined Edinburgh last Thursday.
So in a game of who joined last, I probably
NOTE CONF
win, um, hands down.
So yeah, I'm teaching Introduction to Linear Algebra and a
NOTE CONF
bunch of other courses.
The department really likes to call them by their initials,
NOTE CONF
and it's just my exercise to learn all of them
before the first lecture of each.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, of course, Andreas already gave you all the
information about the course.
NOTE CONF
So what we'll be talking about is, uh, today is
what linear algebra can leads you to Because, as you
NOTE CONF
mentioned, linear algebra is a fundamental part of your mathematical
toolkit.
NOTE CONF
And so I will give you a few examples of
where linear algebra is used.
NOTE CONF
Just a few.
Otherwise we could have an entire semester course just about
NOTE CONF
that.
And I want to do that by going through my
NOTE CONF
experience of linear algebra.
Linear algebra is the first course in mathematics and physics
NOTE CONF
because I did physics in my undergrad, even in Italy.
And the two biggest problem that I found when I
NOTE CONF
did linear algebra for the first time is that it
was a new way of doing math, as Cordelia was
NOTE CONF
explaining so well a moment ago, and also that it's
abstract and for the new way of doing maths, don't
NOTE CONF
worry, you will get used to follow all of the
advice that Andrs gave you.
NOTE CONF
Seek out for help.
We're here right on Piazza.
NOTE CONF
We're just an email away if you need us.
And the second one.
NOTE CONF
Well, let's see that.
That will be my talk.
NOTE CONF
And the obvious reason.
Sorry, the obvious way of, uh, um, going past the
NOTE CONF
problem that linear algebra is very abstract is to try
and visualise it.
NOTE CONF
And the standard way is what Cordelia talked about transformation
in space, either on the plane or in 3D space.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that might work for you, but it might not
work for everyone.
NOTE CONF
And it's also very limiting in what linear algebra can
do.
NOTE CONF
So if you need, um, to think about a few
more ways, uh, where what you're studying and perhaps getting
NOTE CONF
a little bit stuck on it might be useful.
Here are some few interesting examples to keep you motivated
NOTE CONF
throughout these coming ten weeks.
And I'll start by saying that linear algebra truly is
NOTE CONF
the language of applied mathematics.
The applications are endless and these are brought to you
NOTE CONF
in no particular order except the bias of what I
like the most.
NOTE CONF
Video games.
If you've played any major video games in the last
NOTE CONF
few years, you probably have heard of ray tracing.
And ray tracing is the science of generating a virtual
NOTE CONF
image by following light rays bouncing off.
And obviously that is a transformation in R3, the three
NOTE CONF
dimensional space.
And this is why graphics engines are built on linear
NOTE CONF
algebra.
And, uh, this is why GPUs are really good with
NOTE CONF
linear algebra, because creating a scene on the computer is
nothing else but solving a lot of linear algebra problems
NOTE CONF
very quickly.
And this is inherently is also why GPUs are very
NOTE CONF
good at machine learning, because the same mathematics that goes
behind that also goes behind training AI models.
NOTE CONF
And I highlighted these two methods of machine learning, principal
component analysis and singular value decomposition.
NOTE CONF
Because these two methods that are widely used in a
lot of machine learning tasks are lifted straight from the
NOTE CONF
course, they're basically a elaboration of what we would call
eigenvalues and eigenvectors decomposition.
NOTE CONF
So by the end of this course, you should be
able to have a look at those methods and at
NOTE CONF
least have a basic understanding of what is going on.
There are some differences do not apply to square matrices.
NOTE CONF
But we will see that, um, we will see that,
um, later on this semester.
NOTE CONF
Uh, the next one is network analysis, which uh, is
the topic of my PhD.
NOTE CONF
So you will forgive me if I set it aside
for a moment and then come back and talk about
NOTE CONF
it a little bit more extensively in a minute.
There's a lot of, uh, um, applications in physics, for
NOTE CONF
example, fluid dynamics.
They go under the name of finite difference methods for
NOTE CONF
differential equations, for example.
So if you're interested in that side of computational physics,
NOTE CONF
this is also the course for you.
And as I mentioned, I could go on for hours
NOTE CONF
at a time.
Um, but instead let's just go back to a network.
NOTE CONF
A network is a mathematical object model like that.
It's a bunch of elements connecting and interacting pairwise.
NOTE CONF
It could be people connected.
If they're friends together, they could be web pages, if
NOTE CONF
they're connected, if and only if there's a hyperlink from
one to the other.
NOTE CONF
There's blue words that you click and bring you somewhere
else in the World Wide Web.
NOTE CONF
It could be airports connected if and only if there's
a direct flight flying from one to the other.
NOTE CONF
And the trick is that this graph is really just
a matrix that Cordelia was describing, where the matrix is
NOTE CONF
built so that there's a zero between the nodes that
don't have an edge, and the one between the nodes
NOTE CONF
that do have an edge.
Um, and because of that, linear algebra automatically gives a
NOTE CONF
lot of results into a lot of different applications, just
by the fact that so many things, including graphs, can
NOTE CONF
be modelled by matrices and vectors.
So one thing that the that we're able to do
NOTE CONF
is to find communities, group of friends, for example, on
the, on the Facebook friendship networks, probably, um, all the
NOTE CONF
people that who have gone to school with will have
a lots of friendship in common, and so we'll be
NOTE CONF
coloured on the same, um, will be coloured the same
colour on this, on this friendship network.
NOTE CONF
And I really want to stress this comes directly from
analysing that matrix.
NOTE CONF
There is no, um, specific task performed on the graph
here.
NOTE CONF
Just by looking at the matrix, we can recreate that
partition into communities.
NOTE CONF
Another important one, and one that I think is really
cool, is to find the most important nodes in the
NOTE CONF
in the network, or the most important airports, or the
most important web pages on the internet.
NOTE CONF
And here is the same graph just plotted with the
most important nodes plotted bigger.
NOTE CONF
And again, and this result here comes straight from the
application of the eigenvalue decomposition of that matrix representing the
NOTE CONF
graph.
So this is just purely applied linear algebra.
NOTE CONF
It's just the meaning that we're giving to those elements.
Just just so happened to be the World Wide Web
NOTE CONF
just so happens to be a graph.
And the reason why I think this is so cool
NOTE CONF
is because this is how Google was started.
Um, this is the paper that started Google.
NOTE CONF
It literally starts in this paper.
We present Google, and it was a linear algebra idea
NOTE CONF
that Larry Page and Sergey Brin, uh, published in 1998,
and gave rise to the algorithm that sorts the web
NOTE CONF
pages for you.
When you insert a query into the Google ask box
NOTE CONF
if you want.
So whenever you use Google, you're really just asking them
NOTE CONF
to solve a linear algebra problem for you.
Um, and again I want to stress that that problem
NOTE CONF
will be covered in this course.
It's basically an eigenvalue decomposition.
NOTE CONF
So we'll be in week seven I think or something
like that.
NOTE CONF
And yeah it's a big step.
Um, there's a lot of material to cover.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you will see it will all ties in,
it will all train together with each other.
NOTE CONF
So as soon as the machinery of the course gets
going, you will become familiar.
NOTE CONF
Uh, very quickly I renew the invite, not to panic
of Andreas.
NOTE CONF
And you'll be fine.
Uh, just remember that whenever we see something new, try
NOTE CONF
to build on whatever you have seen before, because finding
relationship is really the whole point of mathematics and science
NOTE CONF
in general.
And so enjoy the ride.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So we just.
We could actually write okay, let's see what we're doing.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we think half time for probably ten minutes or
so for questions.
NOTE CONF
Um, in case there are any that you have to
the organisational part or to the mathematical part, anybody.
NOTE CONF
Um right now you can go for the throw or
you can pass it up, I don't know, try it,
NOTE CONF
try it.
Let's see how it works.
NOTE CONF
So we're doing.
This.
NOTE CONF
Uh, how are we going to be split into tutor
groups?
NOTE CONF
So you should have, um, been notified.
I think on your timetable, it tells you a time
NOTE CONF
and some of the slash.
I think it tells you a group number between 1
NOTE CONF
and 60 after the slash.
Um, that will be the tutorial group.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we're all in the same room over in
the nucleus building.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you arrive there, um, we will then tell
you how to work out from your tutorial group.
NOTE CONF
Which table you're on is a simple linear algebra problem
to solve, but you will manage to do that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
If you throw the if you throw the dice back
to us.
NOTE CONF
To you.
You can do it without the catching, if you prefer.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Over there.
I think I.
NOTE CONF
Didn't understand, otherwise I would have.
I would have repeated it.
NOTE CONF
But, um.
You need to talk into the black line.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Oh, wow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so what would you do if you still haven't
NOTE CONF
been employed?
Um, I saw in your optional modules.
NOTE CONF
If you if you haven't been what I.
Saw in your optional modules.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this would be something your, um, cohort lead
or student support, are you.
NOTE CONF
Which which school are you in?
A school of informatics.
NOTE CONF
I don't know how informatics organised, but it'll be on
your side.
NOTE CONF
Your cohort lead or or student support people.
Um, they should look after how to register to option
NOTE CONF
models.
I'm to some extent I know how this course work,
NOTE CONF
and I'm hoping everything does, but there's a lot of
stuff going on behind the scenes.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Any other questions?
NOTE CONF
I just want to pass it on.
Uh, so if there is a clash with the lectures
NOTE CONF
and it's unavoidable, would I be recommended to attend this
lecture?
NOTE CONF
Well, I mean, yes, obviously.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
It depends.
I don't know what the other lecture is, how they're
NOTE CONF
doing it.
Some lectures are easier to just catch up online, or
NOTE CONF
the lectures are more that you want to be there
in person.
NOTE CONF
We do have two separate times.
We're trying to exercise pretty easy, fit it evenly.
NOTE CONF
It won't be quite as crammed as this here, usually
because we have a bigger room.
NOTE CONF
But obviously if everybody's coming at 12:00, we've got a
problem.
NOTE CONF
So that sorts the problem.
That's okay.
NOTE CONF
You can you can request the change of lecture time.
You can request the change of tutorial time.
NOTE CONF
There may be slightly slow doing the request.
Talk to me, email me or so if there's a
NOTE CONF
problem with that.
Um yeah.
NOTE CONF
But because of the interactive nature of the thing, I
would really encourage you to attend the lectures if you
NOTE CONF
want or if you can.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I think I'm reasonably told.
Not that all.
NOTE CONF
Um, how many hours we expected to work on this
course per week?
NOTE CONF
I think the general guideline throughout the university is that
you should have a 40 hour week.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that is roughly split by the number of
credits you have for this course.
NOTE CONF
I think this is a 20 credit course, so it
will be a third of your of the 40 hours
NOTE CONF
in total.
And then together with the other courses.
NOTE CONF
That might of course change.
Sometimes you'll have essays.
NOTE CONF
You have something to do.
But yeah, try to try to understand the material I
NOTE CONF
think most of all.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Maybe 1 or 2 more questions.
The thing I've seen you up before.
NOTE CONF
This is just a quick question about the quizzes.
Are they like, should we do them in exam conditions
NOTE CONF
or are we free to use like, material during.
Uh, so the quizzes.
NOTE CONF
No, they're not tracked.
You can do them at home.
NOTE CONF
Um, just the only thing is there's a time limit
Once you start the quizzes, but otherwise, no, they're not
NOTE CONF
on the exam condition or checked in any way.
You can start them at home whenever you want to,
NOTE CONF
or anywhere with an internet connection, right?
I think I had one.
NOTE CONF
So I'm not sure of the order.
I did see you here first, I think.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
Uh, I've submitted a group change request form for one
NOTE CONF
of the lecturers because of clash.
Um, until that gets actioned, am I okay to just
NOTE CONF
show up for the other one?
I think you just have to show up whenever suits.
NOTE CONF
I know that the last slot, which is probably not
the one that you want, but the 430 slot is
NOTE CONF
not fully booked.
We do have space there.
NOTE CONF
Um, but otherwise.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Just try.
And if we haven't got space, we'll just have to
NOTE CONF
bump you off.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Um, okay, I think I need to stop it at
NOTE CONF
this point.
We've got somebody from the AI society who wants to
NOTE CONF
say a few words.
Um, the three of us are going to disappear because
NOTE CONF
we need to do another the lecture again in a
different part of the campus.
NOTE CONF
If there are any more questions at the tutorials of
the workshops tomorrow, one of us three will be there
NOTE CONF
at every single session, and you can ask us questions
about the course then.
NOTE CONF
You want to wait, wait, wait, wait before you all
rush off, we have you from the AI society wants
NOTE CONF
to just say a few words, so please don't just
run away.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, it's just going to take, like, two minutes.
Um, hi, I'm Valentine, I'm from the Edinburgh AI society.
NOTE CONF
I'm a master's student in cognitive science, and this year
we're doing a bunch of really amazing stuff.
NOTE CONF
I'll start off with the most important one.
You can win 1,000 if you build the best project
NOTE CONF
at our AI I xpo.
This is specifically designed in a way that you don't
NOTE CONF
need any experience.
Uh, creativity is judged very highly, so any of you,
NOTE CONF
even with little coding experience, could actually win this.
Um, it's going to be on the November the 16th.
NOTE CONF
And, um, if you want to get a bit more
experience, uh, in coding and working with AI, we do
NOTE CONF
host workshops every second week starting next week, actually.
Uh, so if you want to get some hands on
NOTE CONF
experience before that, just join us.
Uh, there's all the information on our website, and we're
NOTE CONF
also looking for some people to help out in the
community.
NOTE CONF
So if you have some experience in graphic design, if
you're a photographer, or if you're just generally interested in
NOTE CONF
helping us out, uh, just shoot us a message on
Instagram.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's it.
Thank you very much.
NOTE CONF